---
layout: post
title: In opposition to dualism
author: Mikolaj Metelski
published: true
date: 2021-03-04
---

I would like to argue in opposition to dualism, that is, the division of the world into the physical and the abstract, and in favour of what could be called physical monism.

Firstly, primitive dualism separates *mind and body*. It seems evident to me that information encoded in an arrangement of atoms, in words on a page in neurons of the human brain, is as much part of physical reality as what we recognize as atoms, molecules, rocks and stars. It would be misrecognition to assume an existence of an additional plane of existence beyond the universe that we categorize as physical; misrecognition of the fact that arrangement of objects has a physical reality. After all, information about ourselves, our memories, our personalities, the language we speak, should, in principle, be recoverable from body. We already have the sufficient evidence of the physicality of our thoughts as
1. our bodies being part of the physical wholly,
2. our thoughts being stored in our nervous system.

We may never have  a technological device that accomplishes this task of retrieving useful information from a human brain, but we already have the proof of the feasibility of such a program; we perform it ourselves. The last point might be an odd recycling of anthropic principle, though.

Another category of objects that seem to fit dualist point of view are dubbed *shared knowledge*. Objects like language, or mathematics; ones that are proposed to exist independent of their human expression as utterances of proofs. In the naturalist view they really do have physical, local existence within each of us separately, and none beyond that. The proofs beyond those proven, in that light, do not exist, in the same manner of non-existence as utterances that are not part of any language. This last sentence is to be taken as a sort of enumeration of properties that 'existence' does not have.

Further, there are measurable physical quantities that are *collective*. Things like waves, ant colonies, clouds. They exist by the virtue of categorization. They are separated from other objects by the recognition of a pattern. Reductionism proposes their non-existence, in light of them being reducible into microscopic parts. But to put this in light of the previous point, these things do not exist for a different reason: because we would expect existence to be **continuous** in time. In other words, things do not pop in and out of existence. If they do, they cannot be called as existing, but rather as glimpses of something that exists. Consider this an axiom, a condition that 'existence' must satisfy.

Consider quantum field theory, where particles have lost the continuity of existence. The expectation of continuity of existence has simply been shifted to fields, and they are now not decaying nor created. This amounts to saying, 'particles do not exist in the sense we understand existence. Fields do, though.' Even worse, continuity of existence *in time* has been shifted into continuity of existence *in causal relationship*, by the virtue of applying special relativity. Had a new theory emerged, such in which fields are excitations of some sort super-fields, it is somewhat conceptually required that we keep those super-fields continuously existing. Otherwise, the mechanics of their disappearance and appearance would have to be explained by an even newer entity, hopefully now an eternally (in causal sense) existing one.

On the other hand, even though there is no apparent continuity of existence in collective phenomena, there is still physical reality of the pattern that has been recognised. I have to concede that to keep consistent with the exposition in the first point: recognized patterns have physical existence as arrangement. Here, I want to recall how neural networks store their information in a series of nodes, and connections between them. The information that a neural network has been trained on is somehow embedded in those connections (pehaps not all of it, but at least some part) and no more information is present, beyond what the neural net's designer put in as part of the design. Retrievability of this information is of the same nature as mentioned in the first paragraph about our nervous system. Perhaps this justifies the naming of neural networks as they are named, after all. But this physicality of the recognized collective pattern, stored encrypted as an arrangement of another physical object, is continuously existing, and is not non-existing shared knowledge, and can therefore be considered to exist, unless other criteria are imposed. However, a clear distinction must be made between the collective phenomenon itself, which does not exist, but the recognition thereof, which does.
